docs/functionality/01_optionals.adoc, before:

== Extensions to Optional

The static factory Methods for creating `Optional` instances are not really meant to be used as 
statically imported methods. They have no meaningful names to be used this way. They also differ from
the commonly used names `some`, `none` and `maybe` which are used in many other languages. +
The class `OptionalIntExtensions` provides static factory methods with these common names
which are implemented to be inlined to the factory methods used by the JDK.

Examples:

[source,xtend]
----
import java.util.Optional
import static extension de.fhg.fokus.xtensions.optional.OptionalIntExtensions.*
// ...
val Optional<String> no = none
val Optional<String> yes = some("yesss!")
val Optional<String> dunno = maybe(possiblyNull())
// ...
private def String possiblyNull() {
	if(System.currentTimeMillis % 2 == 0) {
		"I'm in ur optional"
	} else {
		null
	}
}
----

The optional class does not provide a `filter` method, that filters the optional based on the class
the wrapped object is instance of, as known e.g. from Xtend's filter methods on `Iterable`. 
The `OptionalIntExtensions` adds such a method, providing an instance check of the wrapped value.

Example:

[source,xtend]
----
import java.util.Optional
import static extension de.fhg.fokus.xtensions.optional.OptionalIntExtensions.*
// ...
val Optional<Object> optObj = some("Hi there!")
val Optional<String> optStr = optObj.filter(String)
optStr.ifPresent [
	println(it.toUpperCase)
]
----


When testing an `Optional` for a value or otherwise perform a different operation
the optional has to be used twice e.g.

[source,xtend]
----
import java.util.Optional
// ...
val noVal = Optional.empty
if(noVal.isPresent) {
	val value = noVal.get
	println("Here is your value: "+ value)
} else {
	println("Awww, no value")
}
----

This can be error prone, since the optional (in the example `noVal`) has to be
used twice and a different optional may be used accidently. To not run into this 
issue this library provides the `whenPresent` method which allows defining an
else branch on the returned object.

Example:

[source,xtend]
----
import java.util.Optional
import static extension de.fhg.fokus.xtensions.optional.OptionalIntExtensions.*
// ...
val noVal = Optional.empty
noVal.whenPresent [
	println("Here is your value: "+ it)
].elseDo [
	println("Awww, no value")
]
----

Alternatively, the `ifPresentOrElse` extension method can be used, but this does not
have a clear visual separation which case is the if and which the else callback.

To avoid allocating objects over and over for the lambda passed to the 
`elseDo` method, there are overloaded versions of the method passing on
additional parameters to the lambda. This can avoid "capturing" lambdas 
which would create a new object on every `elseDo` call.

Example:

[source,xtend]
----
import java.util.Optional
import static extension de.fhg.fokus.xtensions.optional.OptionalIntExtensions.*
// ...
val captureMe = "no value"
val noVal = Optional.empty
noVal.whenPresent [
	println("Here is your value: "+ it)
].elseDo(captureMe) [
	println("Awww, " + it)
]
----


To bridge between APIs providing an `Optional` value and ones that expect
multiple values, the extension methods `asIterable`, `toList` and `toSet`
are provided to create immutable implementations of common JVM collection APIs.

 
The `Optional` class has a `map` method that can map the value present in the optional
to a value of another type. Unfortunately there is no method to map to a primitive type
returning a primitive optional, such as `OptionalInt`. The extension methods `mapInt`,
`mapLong`, and `mapDouble` allow mapping to primitive options without having to
box the resulting value.

Example:

[source,xtend]
----
import java.util.Optional
import static extension de.fhg.fokus.xtensions.optional.OptionalIntExtensions.*
// ...
val Optional<String> yes = some("yesss!")
val OptionalInt lenOpt = yes.mapInt[length]
val len = lenOpt.orElse(0)
println("Length is " + len)
----


Some methods on Optional introduced in Java 9 are available as retrofitted extension methods.
When compiling a class using the extension method targeting Java 9, the native Optional method has precedence and will be used.
No changes in the source code has to be done to switch to the native Java 9 implementation.
The following instance methods of Optional are backported for Java 8:

* http://docs.oracle.com/javase/9/docs/api/java/util/Optional.html#or-java.util.function.Supplier-[Optional<T> or​(Supplier<? extends Optional<? extends T>> supplier)]
* http://docs.oracle.com/javase/9/docs/api/java/util/Optional.html#ifPresentOrElse-java.util.function.Consumer-java.lang.Runnable-[void ifPresentOrElse​(Consumer<? super T> action, Runnable emptyAction)]
* http://docs.oracle.com/javase/9/docs/api/java/util/Optional.html#stream--[Stream<T> stream​()]
​

As a shortcut for the `or` extension method, the `||` operator is provided. The `?:` operator is a shortcut for the `orElse` method on Optional.

[TIP]
====
Related JavaDocs:

* link:https://javadoc.io/page/com.github.fraunhoferfokus.xtensions/de.fhg.fokus.xtensions/latest/de/fhg/fokus/xtensions/optional/OptionalExtensions.html[OptionalExtensions]
====

== Extensions to Primitive Optionals

Extensions to the primitive versions of Optional are provided by the following classes:

	de.fhg.fokus.xtensions.optional.OptionalIntExtensions
	de.fhg.fokus.xtensions.optional.OptionalLongExtensions
	de.fhg.fokus.xtensions.optional.OptionalDoubleExtensions

Same as for Optional, there is a `some` alias for the `OptionalInt.of`, `OptionalLong.of`, and `OptionalDouble.of`
methods (see <<Extensions to Optional>>). +
The methods `noInt`, `noLong`, and `noDouble` provide empty primitive Optionals.

The Open JDK / Oracle JDK currently does not cache OptionalInt and OptionalLong instances in the static factory method 
`OptionalInt.of(int)` and `OptionalLong.of(long)` as it is currently done for Integer creation in 
`Integer.valueOf(int)`. To provide such a caching static factory methods, the 
`OptionalIntExtensions.someOf(int)` and `OptionalLongExtensions.someOf(long)` method were 
introduced.

Example:


[source,xtend]
----
import static de.fhg.fokus.xtensions.optional.OptionalIntExtensions.*
// ...
if(someOf(42) === someOf(42)) {
	println("someOf caches instances")
}
----

Stunningly, the primitive versions of Optional do not provide `map` and `filter` methods. These 
are provided as extension methods by this library.

[TIP]
====
Related JavaDocs:

* https://javadoc.io/page/com.github.fraunhoferfokus.xtensions/de.fhg.fokus.xtensions/latest/de/fhg/fokus/xtensions/optional/OptionalIntExtensions.html[OptionalIntExtensions]
* https://javadoc.io/page/com.github.fraunhoferfokus.xtensions/de.fhg.fokus.xtensions/latest/de/fhg/fokus/xtensions/optional/OptionalLongExtensions.html[OptionalLongExtensions]
* https://javadoc.io/page/com.github.fraunhoferfokus.xtensions/de.fhg.fokus.xtensions/latest/de/fhg/fokus/xtensions/optional/OptionalDoubleExtensions.html[OptionalDoubleExtensions]
====

Commit message:

[#6] Implementation of mapOrGet extension method to Optional

docs/functionality/01_optionals.adoc, after:

== Extensions to Optional

The static factory Methods for creating `Optional` instances are not really meant to be used as 
statically imported methods. They have no meaningful names to be used this way. They also differ from
the commonly used names `some`, `none` and `maybe` which are used in many other languages. +
The class `OptionalIntExtensions` provides static factory methods with these common names
which are implemented to be inlined to the factory methods used by the JDK.

Examples:

[source,xtend]
----
import java.util.Optional
import static extension de.fhg.fokus.xtensions.optional.OptionalIntExtensions.*
// ...
val Optional<String> no = none
val Optional<String> yes = some("yesss!")
val Optional<String> dunno = maybe(possiblyNull())
// ...
private def String possiblyNull() {
	if(System.currentTimeMillis % 2 == 0) {
		"I'm in ur optional"
	} else {
		null
	}
}
----

The optional class does not provide a `filter` method, that filters the optional based on the class
the wrapped object is instance of, as known e.g. from Xtend's filter methods on `Iterable`. 
The `OptionalIntExtensions` adds such a method, providing an instance check of the wrapped value.

Example:

[source,xtend]
----
import java.util.Optional
import static extension de.fhg.fokus.xtensions.optional.OptionalIntExtensions.*
// ...
val Optional<Object> optObj = some("Hi there!")
val Optional<String> optStr = optObj.filter(String)
optStr.ifPresent [
	println(it.toUpperCase)
]
----


When testing an `Optional` for a value or otherwise perform a different operation
the optional has to be used twice e.g.

[source,xtend]
----
import java.util.Optional
// ...
val noVal = Optional.empty
if(noVal.isPresent) {
	val value = noVal.get
	println("Here is your value: "+ value)
} else {
	println("Awww, no value")
}
----

This can be error prone, since the optional (in the example `noVal`) has to be
used twice and a different optional may be used accidently. To not run into this 
issue this library provides the `whenPresent` method which allows defining an
else branch on the returned object.

Example:

[source,xtend]
----
import java.util.Optional
import static extension de.fhg.fokus.xtensions.optional.OptionalIntExtensions.*
// ...
val noVal = Optional.empty
noVal.whenPresent [
	println("Here is your value: "+ it)
].elseDo [
	println("Awww, no value")
]
----

Alternatively, the `ifPresentOrElse` extension method can be used, but this does not
have a clear visual separation which case is the if and which the else callback.

To avoid allocating objects over and over for the lambda passed to the 
`elseDo` method, there are overloaded versions of the method passing on
additional parameters to the lambda. This can avoid "capturing" lambdas 
which would create a new object on every `elseDo` call.

Example:

[source,xtend]
----
import java.util.Optional
import static extension de.fhg.fokus.xtensions.optional.OptionalIntExtensions.*
// ...
val captureMe = "no value"
val noVal = Optional.empty
noVal.whenPresent [
	println("Here is your value: "+ it)
].elseDo(captureMe) [
	println("Awww, " + it)
]
----


To bridge between APIs providing an `Optional` value and ones that expect
multiple values, the extension methods `asIterable`, `toList` and `toSet`
are provided to create immutable implementations of common JVM collection APIs.

 
The `Optional` class has a `map` method that can map the value present in the optional
to a value of another type. Unfortunately there is no method to map to a primitive type
returning a primitive optional, such as `OptionalInt`. The extension methods `mapInt`,
`mapLong`, and `mapDouble` allow mapping to primitive options without having to
box the resulting value.

Example:

[source,xtend]
----
import java.util.Optional
import static extension de.fhg.fokus.xtensions.optional.OptionalIntExtensions.*
// ...
val Optional<String> yes = some("yesss!")
val OptionalInt lenOpt = yes.mapInt[length]
val len = lenOpt.orElse(0)
println("Length is " + len)
----

The call chain `map[...].orElseGet[..]` is pretty common. As a shortcut the method `mapOrGet` 
is provided.


Some methods on Optional introduced in Java 9 are available as retrofitted extension methods.
When compiling a class using the extension method targeting Java 9, the native Optional method has precedence and will be used.
No changes in the source code has to be done to switch to the native Java 9 implementation.
The following instance methods of Optional are backported for Java 8:

* http://docs.oracle.com/javase/9/docs/api/java/util/Optional.html#or-java.util.function.Supplier-[Optional<T> or​(Supplier<? extends Optional<? extends T>> supplier)]
* http://docs.oracle.com/javase/9/docs/api/java/util/Optional.html#ifPresentOrElse-java.util.function.Consumer-java.lang.Runnable-[void ifPresentOrElse​(Consumer<? super T> action, Runnable emptyAction)]
* http://docs.oracle.com/javase/9/docs/api/java/util/Optional.html#stream--[Stream<T> stream​()]
​

As a shortcut for the `or` extension method, the `||` operator is provided. The `?:` operator is a shortcut for the `orElse` method on Optional.

[TIP]
====
Related JavaDocs:

* link:https://javadoc.io/page/com.github.fraunhoferfokus.xtensions/de.fhg.fokus.xtensions/latest/de/fhg/fokus/xtensions/optional/OptionalExtensions.html[OptionalExtensions]
====

== Extensions to Primitive Optionals

Extensions to the primitive versions of Optional are provided by the following classes:

	de.fhg.fokus.xtensions.optional.OptionalIntExtensions
	de.fhg.fokus.xtensions.optional.OptionalLongExtensions
	de.fhg.fokus.xtensions.optional.OptionalDoubleExtensions

Same as for Optional, there is a `some` alias for the `OptionalInt.of`, `OptionalLong.of`, and `OptionalDouble.of`
methods (see <<Extensions to Optional>>). +
The methods `noInt`, `noLong`, and `noDouble` provide empty primitive Optionals.

The Open JDK / Oracle JDK currently does not cache OptionalInt and OptionalLong instances in the static factory method 
`OptionalInt.of(int)` and `OptionalLong.of(long)` as it is currently done for Integer creation in 
`Integer.valueOf(int)`. To provide such a caching static factory methods, the 
`OptionalIntExtensions.someOf(int)` and `OptionalLongExtensions.someOf(long)` method were 
introduced.

Example:


[source,xtend]
----
import static de.fhg.fokus.xtensions.optional.OptionalIntExtensions.*
// ...
if(someOf(42) === someOf(42)) {
	println("someOf caches instances")
}
----

Stunningly, the primitive versions of Optional do not provide `map` and `filter` methods. These 
are provided as extension methods by this library.

[TIP]
====
Related JavaDocs:

* https://javadoc.io/page/com.github.fraunhoferfokus.xtensions/de.fhg.fokus.xtensions/latest/de/fhg/fokus/xtensions/optional/OptionalIntExtensions.html[OptionalIntExtensions]
* https://javadoc.io/page/com.github.fraunhoferfokus.xtensions/de.fhg.fokus.xtensions/latest/de/fhg/fokus/xtensions/optional/OptionalLongExtensions.html[OptionalLongExtensions]
* https://javadoc.io/page/com.github.fraunhoferfokus.xtensions/de.fhg.fokus.xtensions/latest/de/fhg/fokus/xtensions/optional/OptionalDoubleExtensions.html[OptionalDoubleExtensions]
====
