docs/functionality/07_iterator.adoc, before:


== Extensions to Iterator

To map from an Iterator (over references) to a link:https://docs.oracle.com/javase/9/docs/api/java/util/PrimitiveIterator.html[``PrimitiveIterator``s],
the class `de.fhg.fokus.xtensions.iteration.IteratorExtensions` provides the methods `mapInt`, `mapLong` and `mapDouble`.

[source,xtend]
----
import static java.util.stream.Collectors.*
import static extension de.fhg.fokus.xtensions.iteration.IteratorExtensions.*
// ...
val Iterable<String> strings = #["fooooo", "baar", "baz"]
val summary = strings.iterator.mapInt[length].summarize
println("Size of longest string is " + summary.max)
----

TIP: See <<09_primitive_iterators.adoc#,Primitive Iterators>> for more information on the `summarize` extension function. 


To exclude elements of one `Iterable` from the sequence provided by an `Iterator`, the method `withoutAll` can be used.
[source,xtend]
----
val s = #["I", "boo", "pity", "char", "the", "fool"]
	.iterator
	.withoutAll(#{"boo", "char"})
	.join(" ")
println(s)
----

CAUTION: Performance of `withoutAll` is best when using an appropriate `java.util.Set`, such as `HashSet` for the elements to exclude.


To partition the elements provided by an iterator based on a predicate or the class (elements are tested to be instance of) into two parts: 
selected and rejected. The selected part will contain the elements for which the predicate evaluates to `true` or elements are instance 
of the given partitioning class. The rejected part will contain the other elements. 

Example:


[source,xtend]
----
import static extension de.fhg.fokus.xtensions.iteration.IteratorExtensions.*
// ...
val char[] chars = #[0x0020 as char, 0x0034 as char]
val List<CharSequence> list = #[
	"Hello", 
	new StringBuilder().append(chars), 
	"Xtend", 
	new StringBuilder().append(0x0032 as char)
]
list.iterator.partitionBy(String) => [
	println('''Selected: "«selected.join(" ")»"''')	
	println('''Rejected: "«rejected.join("")»"''')
]
---- 

For both versions of the `partitionBy` method there exist overloads that take instances of https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/stream/Collector.html[`Collector`].

Example:


[source,xtend]
----
import static extension de.fhg.fokus.xtensions.iteration.IteratorExtensions.*
import static java.util.stream.Collectors.*
import java.util.Set
import java.util.List
// ...
val list = #["foo", "bla", "foo", "hui", "fun"]
val partition = list.iterator.partitionBy([startsWith("f")], toSet, toList)
val Set<String> selected = partition.selected
val List<String> rejected = partition.rejected
println("Unique words starting with 'f' : " + selected.join(", "))
println("Other words: " + rejected.join(", "))
---- 


Note that the https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/stream/Collectors.html#partitioningBy-java.util.function.Predicate-[`Collectors#partitioningBy`] Collector from the JDK aggregates into a `Map<Boolean,List<T>>` where `T` is the type of the elements in a collected stream. Another https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/stream/Collectors.html#partitioningBy-java.util.function.Predicate-java.util.stream.Collector-[`partitioningBy`] overload from `Collectors` aggregates the map values and returns a `Map<Boolean,D>` where `D` is the aggregation of a "downstream" `Collector`. 


[source,xtend]
----
val list = #["foo", "bla", "foo", "hui", "fun"]
val partition = list.iterator.partitionBy([startsWith("f")], Collectors::toSet, Collectors::toList)
val Set<String> selected = partition.selected
val List<String> rejected = partition.rejected
println("Unique words starting with 'f' : " + selected.join(", "))
println("Other words: " + rejected.join(", "))
---- 

To allow a similar workflow to the JDK version, for the `Partition` of this library a `asMap` extension method is provided 
for `Partitions` having the same type for the selected and rejected part. The other way around an extension method is provided 
to wrap a `Map<Boolean,X>` into a `Partition<X,X>`.


[TIP]
====
Related JavaDocs:

* https://javadoc.io/page/com.github.fraunhoferfokus.xtensions/de.fhg.fokus.xtensions/latest/de/fhg/fokus/xtensions/iteration/IteratorExtensions.html[IteratorExtensions]
====

Commit message:

#16: Add into(Collection) extension method to Iterator/Iterable
* Added into extension methods for Iterator/Iterable to add the elements
  to one or many collections.

Task-Url: https://github.com/fraunhoferfokus/Xtensions/issues/16

docs/functionality/07_iterator.adoc, after:


== Extensions to Iterator

To map from an Iterator (over references) to a link:https://docs.oracle.com/javase/9/docs/api/java/util/PrimitiveIterator.html[``PrimitiveIterator``s],
the class `de.fhg.fokus.xtensions.iteration.IteratorExtensions` provides the methods `mapInt`, `mapLong` and `mapDouble`.

[source,xtend]
----
import static java.util.stream.Collectors.*
import static extension de.fhg.fokus.xtensions.iteration.IteratorExtensions.*
// ...
val Iterable<String> strings = #["fooooo", "baar", "baz"]
val summary = strings.iterator.mapInt[length].summarize
println("Size of longest string is " + summary.max)
----

TIP: See <<09_primitive_iterators.adoc#,Primitive Iterators>> for more information on the `summarize` extension function. 


To exclude elements of one `Iterable` from the sequence provided by an `Iterator`, the method `withoutAll` can be used.
[source,xtend]
----
val s = #["I", "boo", "pity", "char", "the", "fool"]
	.iterator
	.withoutAll(#{"boo", "char"})
	.join(" ")
println(s)
----

CAUTION: Performance of `withoutAll` is best when using an appropriate `java.util.Set`, such as `HashSet` for the elements to exclude.


To partition the elements provided by an iterator based on a predicate or the class (elements are tested to be instance of) into two parts: 
selected and rejected. The selected part will contain the elements for which the predicate evaluates to `true` or elements are instance 
of the given partitioning class. The rejected part will contain the other elements. 

Example:


[source,xtend]
----
import static extension de.fhg.fokus.xtensions.iteration.IteratorExtensions.*
// ...
val char[] chars = #[0x0020 as char, 0x0034 as char]
val List<CharSequence> list = #[
	"Hello", 
	new StringBuilder().append(chars), 
	"Xtend", 
	new StringBuilder().append(0x0032 as char)
]
list.iterator.partitionBy(String) => [
	println('''Selected: "«selected.join(" ")»"''')	
	println('''Rejected: "«rejected.join("")»"''')
]
---- 

For both versions of the `partitionBy` method there exist overloads that take instances of https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/stream/Collector.html[`Collector`].

Example:


[source,xtend]
----
import static extension de.fhg.fokus.xtensions.iteration.IteratorExtensions.*
import static java.util.stream.Collectors.*
import java.util.Set
import java.util.List
// ...
val list = #["foo", "bla", "foo", "hui", "fun"]
val partition = list.iterator.partitionBy([startsWith("f")], toSet, toList)
val Set<String> selected = partition.selected
val List<String> rejected = partition.rejected
println("Unique words starting with 'f' : " + selected.join(", "))
println("Other words: " + rejected.join(", "))
---- 


Note that the https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/stream/Collectors.html#partitioningBy-java.util.function.Predicate-[`Collectors#partitioningBy`] Collector from the JDK aggregates into a `Map<Boolean,List<T>>` where `T` is the type of the elements in a collected stream. Another https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/stream/Collectors.html#partitioningBy-java.util.function.Predicate-java.util.stream.Collector-[`partitioningBy`] overload from `Collectors` aggregates the map values and returns a `Map<Boolean,D>` where `D` is the aggregation of a "downstream" `Collector`. 


[source,xtend]
----
val list = #["foo", "bla", "foo", "hui", "fun"]
val partition = list.iterator.partitionBy([startsWith("f")], Collectors::toSet, Collectors::toList)
val Set<String> selected = partition.selected
val List<String> rejected = partition.rejected
println("Unique words starting with 'f' : " + selected.join(", "))
println("Other words: " + rejected.join(", "))
---- 

To allow a similar workflow to the JDK version, for the `Partition` of this library a `asMap` extension method is provided 
for `Partitions` having the same type for the selected and rejected part. The other way around an extension method is provided 
to wrap a `Map<Boolean,X>` into a `Partition<X,X>`.


To add elements from an `Iterator` to one or more collections, the `into` extension method is provided by the class `IterableExtensions`.

Example:

[source,xtend]
----
val namesWithB = newArrayList("Barbara", "Bob", "Brian")
val newNames = #["Justin", "Anna", "Bruce", "Chris", "Becky"]
newNames.iterator
	.filter[it.toFirstLower.startsWith("b")]
	.into(namesWithB)

namesWithB.forEach[
	println(it)
]
----


[TIP]
====
Related JavaDocs:

* https://javadoc.io/page/com.github.fraunhoferfokus.xtensions/de.fhg.fokus.xtensions/latest/de/fhg/fokus/xtensions/iteration/IteratorExtensions.html[IteratorExtensions]
====
