docs/functionality/08_primitive_iterables.adoc, before:

== Primitive Iterables

The JDK provides a generic http://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/Iterator.html[`java.util.Iterator<T>`] interface and 
primitive versions of the Iterator in form of the sub-interfaces of 
http://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/PrimitiveIterator.html[`java.util.PrimitiveIterator<T,T_CONS>`]. However, 
there are no primitive versions of the http://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/lang/Iterable.html[`java.lang.Iterable<T>`] 
interface, constructing primitive iterators.

So the JDK is missing an interface to abstract over "a bunch" of primitive numbers to iterate over. A primitive iterator or primitive 
stream can only traversed once, which is not very satisfying in many cases. Ideally there should be in interface allowing the 
iteration over a (possibly infinite) sequence of primitive numbers. We want to be able to get a primitive iterator, a primitive 
stream, or directly iterate over the elements with a `forEach` method. A set of these interfaces is provided in package 
`de.fhg.fokus.xtensions.iteration`. +
The primitive Iterable versions provided in the package all specialize `java.lang.Iterable` with the boxed
number type, but also provide specialized functions for providing primitive iterators, primitive streams, and 
forEach methods that do not rely on boxing the primitive values when passing them on to the consumer.

In the following sections we will explore the ways to create those primitive Iterables.  
Primitive Iterables can be created ...

- <<From Iterables>>
- <<From Arrays>>
- <<From Computations>>
- <<From Xtend Ranges>>
- or <<From Primitive Optionals>>

Examples for usage of primitive Iterables:

[source,xtend]
----
import java.util.PrimitiveIterator
import static extension de.fhg.fokus.xtensions.iteration.IntIterable.*
// ...

def printHex(IntIterable ints) {
	ints.forEachInt [
		val hex = Integer.toHexString(it)
		println(hex)
	]
}

def printHex(IntIterable ints, int limit) {
	val PrimitiveIterator.OfInt iter = ints.iterator
	for(var counter = 0; iter.hasNext && counter < limit; counter++) {
		val i = iter.nextInt
		val hex = Integer.toHexString(i)
		println(hex)
	}
}

def printHexOdd(IntIterable ints) {
	val IntStream s = ints.stream.filter[it % 2 == 1]
	s.forEach [
		val hex = Long.toHexString(it)
		println(hex)
	]
}
----


[[from-iterables]]
=== From Iterables

Iterables can be mapped to primitive iterables by the special map extension functions `mapInt`, `mapLong`
and `mapDouble` defined in `de.fhg.fokus.xtensions.iteration.IterableExtensions`.

Example:

[source,xtend]
----
import static extension de.fhg.fokus.xtensions.iteration.IterableExtensions.*
import de.fhg.fokus.xtensions.iteration.IntIterable
// ...
val IntIterable lengths = newArrayList("foo", "baaaar", "bz").mapInt[length]
----


=== From Arrays

The `asIntIterable` extension method method creates a primitive iterable for primitive arrays.
There are two versions: One version creates an iterable over the complete array, the other one produces
an iterable over a section of the array. The section can be specified by defining the start index and
an excluding end index. 

Example:


[source,xtend]
----
import static extension de.fhg.fokus.xtensions.iteration.PrimitiveArrayExtensions.*
import de.fhg.fokus.xtensions.iteration.IntIterable
// ...
val int[] arr = #[0,2,4,19,-10,10_000,Integer.MAX_VALUE,Integer.MIN_VALUE]
var IntIterable ints = arr.asIntIterable(1, arr.length - 1)  // omit first and last element
----


=== From Computations

Currently only available on IntIterable

To create an IntIterable representing an infinite number of int values the static `generate`
factory method can be used. This method has to provided with a function which itself provides
an `IntSupplier`. The function will be called each time a `PrimitiveIterator.OfInt`
is needed or an `IntStream` is created from the `IntIterable`.

Example:

[source,xtend]
----
import de.fhg.fokus.xtensions.iteration.IntIterable
// ...
val IntIterable ints = IntIterable.generate [
	val rand = new Random;
	[rand.nextInt]
]
----


For IntIterables of infinite int values that can be simply computed from a 
seed value and a mapping function from the previous to the next value, the 
`iterate` factory method can be used. The seed value provided will be returned
as the first element of the iterable.

Example:

[source,xtend]
----
import de.fhg.fokus.xtensions.iteration.IntIterable
// ...
val IntIterable ints = IntIterable.iterate(1)[it * 2]
----

If a finite IntIterable is needed that can be constructed similar to the classical 
for-loop, the `iterate` method with three parameters can be used. The first argument
defines the first (seed) value , the second argument defines the termination condition.
While this condition holds a next value is provided. If the condition does not hold 
for the initial value, an empty IntIterable is created.
The third argument defines the function calculating the next value from the previous one.

Example:

[source,xtend]
----
import de.fhg.fokus.xtensions.iteration.IntIterable
// ...
val IntIterable ints = IntIterable.iterate(0, [it<=10], [it+2])
// will provide values 0, 2, 4, 6, 8, and 10
----


[TIP]
====
Related JavaDocs:

* https://javadoc.io/page/com.github.fraunhoferfokus.xtensions/de.fhg.fokus.xtensions/latest/de/fhg/fokus/xtensions/iteration/DoubleIterable.html[DoubleIterable]
* https://javadoc.io/page/com.github.fraunhoferfokus.xtensions/de.fhg.fokus.xtensions/latest/de/fhg/fokus/xtensions/iteration/IntIterable.html[IntIterable]
* https://javadoc.io/page/com.github.fraunhoferfokus.xtensions/de.fhg.fokus.xtensions/latest/de/fhg/fokus/xtensions/iteration/LongIterable.html[LongIterable]
====


=== From Xtend Ranges

Creating iterables from `org.eclipse.xtext.xbase.lib.IntegerRange` can be done via the extensions 
class `de.fhg.fokus.xtensions.range.RangeExtensions`.

Example:

[source,xtend]
----
import static org.eclipse.xtext.xbase.lib.IntegerRange.*
// ...
val IntIterable iter = (0..50).withStep(2).asIntIterable
----


Creating an iterable from an `org.eclipse.xtext.xbase.lib.ExclusiveRange` is currently not supported
due to the public API limitations on that class. 


=== From Primitive Optionals

The extension classes for primitive Optionals allow the creation of primitive iterables allowing 
iteration over either one or no value, depending on the source Optional.

Example:


[source,xtend]
----
import static extension de.fhg.fokus.xtensions.optional.OptionalIntExtensions.*
// ...
val IntItreable ints = some(42).asIterable
----

Commit message:

Added ItertorExtensions API
* Added mapInt, mapLong and mapDouble extension methods on Iterator
* Introduced documentation for IteratorExtensions (not finished yet)

docs/functionality/08_primitive_iterables.adoc, after:

== Primitive Iterables

The JDK provides a generic http://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/Iterator.html[`java.util.Iterator<T>`] interface and 
primitive versions of the Iterator in form of the sub-interfaces of 
http://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/PrimitiveIterator.html[`java.util.PrimitiveIterator<T,T_CONS>`]. However, 
there are no primitive versions of the http://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/lang/Iterable.html[`java.lang.Iterable<T>`] 
interface, constructing primitive iterators.

So the JDK is missing an interface to abstract over "a bunch" of primitive numbers to iterate over. A primitive iterator or primitive 
stream can only traversed once, which is not very satisfying in many cases. Ideally there should be in interface allowing the 
iteration over a (possibly infinite) sequence of primitive numbers. We want to be able to get a primitive iterator, a primitive 
stream, or directly iterate over the elements with a `forEach` method. A set of these interfaces is provided in package 
`de.fhg.fokus.xtensions.iteration`. +
The primitive Iterable versions provided in the package all specialize `java.lang.Iterable` with the boxed
number type, but also provide specialized functions for providing primitive iterators, primitive streams, and 
forEach methods that do not rely on boxing the primitive values when passing them on to the consumer.

In the following sections we will explore the ways to create those primitive Iterables.  
Primitive Iterables can be created ...

- <<From Iterables>>
- <<From Arrays>>
- <<From Computations>>
- <<From Xtend Ranges>>
- or <<From Primitive Optionals>>

Examples for usage of primitive Iterables:

[source,xtend]
----
import java.util.PrimitiveIterator
import static extension de.fhg.fokus.xtensions.iteration.IntIterable.*
// ...

def printHex(IntIterable ints) {
	ints.forEachInt [
		val hex = Integer.toHexString(it)
		println(hex)
	]
}

def printHex(IntIterable ints, int limit) {
	val PrimitiveIterator.OfInt iter = ints.iterator
	for(var counter = 0; iter.hasNext && counter < limit; counter++) {
		val i = iter.nextInt
		val hex = Integer.toHexString(i)
		println(hex)
	}
}

def printHexOdd(IntIterable ints) {
	val IntStream s = ints.stream.filter[it % 2 == 1]
	s.forEach [
		val hex = Long.toHexString(it)
		println(hex)
	]
}
----


[[from-iterables]]
=== From Iterables

Iterables can be mapped to primitive iterables by the special map extension functions `mapInt`, `mapLong`
and `mapDouble` defined in `de.fhg.fokus.xtensions.iteration.IterableExtensions`.

Example:

[source,xtend]
----
import static extension de.fhg.fokus.xtensions.iteration.IterableExtensions.*
import de.fhg.fokus.xtensions.iteration.IntIterable
// ...
val IntIterable lengths = newArrayList("foo", "baaaar", "bz").mapInt[length]
----


=== From Arrays

The `asIntIterable` extension method method creates a primitive iterable for primitive arrays.
There are two versions: One version creates an iterable over the complete array, the other one produces
an iterable over a section of the array. The section can be specified by defining the start index and
an excluding end index. 

Example:


[source,xtend]
----
import static extension de.fhg.fokus.xtensions.iteration.PrimitiveArrayExtensions.*
import de.fhg.fokus.xtensions.iteration.IntIterable
// ...
val int[] arr = #[0,2,4,19,-10,10_000,Integer.MAX_VALUE,Integer.MIN_VALUE]
var IntIterable ints = arr.asIntIterable(1, arr.length - 1)  // omit first and last element
----


=== From Computations

In following we are using IntIterable to show how to create computed primitive iterables,
but respective factory methods are also available on LongIterable and DoubleIterable.

To create an IntIterable representing an infinite number of int values the static `generate`
factory method can be used. This method has to provided with a function which itself provides
an `IntSupplier`. The function will be called each time a `PrimitiveIterator.OfInt`
is needed or an `IntStream` is created from the `IntIterable`.

Example:

[source,xtend]
----
import de.fhg.fokus.xtensions.iteration.IntIterable
// ...
val IntIterable ints = IntIterable.generate [
	val rand = new Random;
	[rand.nextInt]
]
----


For IntIterables of infinite int values that can be simply computed from a 
seed value and a mapping function from the previous to the next value, the 
`iterate` factory method can be used. The seed value provided will be returned
as the first element of the iterable.

Example:

[source,xtend]
----
import de.fhg.fokus.xtensions.iteration.IntIterable
// ...
val IntIterable ints = IntIterable.iterate(1)[it * 2]
----

If a finite IntIterable is needed that can be constructed similar to the classical 
for-loop, the `iterate` method with three parameters can be used. The first argument
defines the first (seed) value , the second argument defines the termination condition.
While this condition holds a next value is provided. If the condition does not hold 
for the initial value, an empty IntIterable is created.
The third argument defines the function calculating the next value from the previous one.

Example:

[source,xtend]
----
import de.fhg.fokus.xtensions.iteration.IntIterable
// ...
val IntIterable ints = IntIterable.iterate(0, [it<=10], [it+2])
// will provide values 0, 2, 4, 6, 8, and 10
----


[TIP]
====
Related JavaDocs:

* https://javadoc.io/page/com.github.fraunhoferfokus.xtensions/de.fhg.fokus.xtensions/latest/de/fhg/fokus/xtensions/iteration/DoubleIterable.html[DoubleIterable]
* https://javadoc.io/page/com.github.fraunhoferfokus.xtensions/de.fhg.fokus.xtensions/latest/de/fhg/fokus/xtensions/iteration/IntIterable.html[IntIterable]
* https://javadoc.io/page/com.github.fraunhoferfokus.xtensions/de.fhg.fokus.xtensions/latest/de/fhg/fokus/xtensions/iteration/LongIterable.html[LongIterable]
====


=== From Xtend Ranges

Creating iterables from `org.eclipse.xtext.xbase.lib.IntegerRange` can be done via the extensions 
class `de.fhg.fokus.xtensions.range.RangeExtensions`.

Example:

[source,xtend]
----
import static org.eclipse.xtext.xbase.lib.IntegerRange.*
// ...
val IntIterable iter = (0..50).withStep(2).asIntIterable
----


Creating an iterable from an `org.eclipse.xtext.xbase.lib.ExclusiveRange` is currently not supported
due to the public API limitations on that class. 


=== From Primitive Optionals

The extension classes for primitive Optionals allow the creation of primitive iterables allowing 
iteration over either one or no value, depending on the source Optional.

Example:


[source,xtend]
----
import static extension de.fhg.fokus.xtensions.optional.OptionalIntExtensions.*
// ...
val IntItreable ints = some(42).asIterable
----
