docs/functionality/16_primitives.adoc, before:


== Primitives

The class `de.fhg.fokus.xtensions.Primitives` provides a bunch of static extension methods 
that are aimed to help handling primitive values at the end of null-safe navigation chains.


=== Boxing Primitives

Boxing the primitive value of a property at the end of a null-safe call chain.

Example:

[source,xtend]
----
import static extension de.fhg.fokus.xtensions.Primitives.*
// ...
val person = loadPerson("Mike")
person?.lastName.box[isEmpty]

----

=== Testing Conditions

Boxed boolean values (e.g. produced by functions described in <<Boxing Primitives>>) can be tested 
directly with the `null`-aware extension methods `isTrue`, `isFalse`, `isNullOrTrue`, `isNullOrFalse`.


Example:

[source,xtend]
----
----

To test un-boxed primitives, one of the `isTrue`, `isFalse`, `isNullOrTrue`, `isNullOrFalse` methods.


Example:

[source,xtend]
----
----


=== Conversion to Optionals

=== Default Values on `null` Boxes

[TIP]
====
Related JavaDocs:

* https://javadoc.io/page/com.github.fraunhoferfokus.xtensions/de.fhg.fokus.xtensions/latest/de/fhg/fokus/xtensions/Primitives.html[Primitives]
====

Commit message:

#19: Added documentation and tests for primitive value helpers
* Fixed some setup issues
* Added tests for Primaries helpers
* Added javadoc documentation to Primitives helper methods
* GitBook documentation still incomplete

docs/functionality/16_primitives.adoc, after:


== Primitives

The class `de.fhg.fokus.xtensions.Primitives` provides a bunch of static extension methods 
that are aimed to help handling primitive values at the end of null-safe navigation chains.


=== Boxing Primitives

To box the primitive value of a property at the end of a null-safe call chain, the `Primitives`
class provides the `box` and `boxNum` extension functions. These are intended to be used on 
the object, that's primitive property should be boxed. The function passed to the box function
is used to retrieve the primitive property.

Example:

[source,xtend]
----
import static extension de.fhg.fokus.xtensions.Primitives.*
// ...
val person = loadPerson("Mike")
person?.lastName.boxNum[length]
----
In this example the last expression evaluates to an `Integer` which is `null` if `person` or `lastName`
is `null`. Otherwise it will hold the length of the of the `lastName` string.

=== Testing Conditions

Boxed boolean values (e.g. produced by functions described in <<Boxing Primitives>>) can be tested 
directly with the `null`-aware extension methods `isTrue`, `isFalse`, `isNullOrTrue`, `isNullOrFalse`.


Example:

[source,xtend]
----
----

To test un-boxed primitives, one of the `isTrue`, `isFalse`, `isNullOrTrue`, `isNullOrFalse` methods.


Example:

[source,xtend]
----
----


=== Conversion to Optionals

Similar to the <<Boxing Primitives>> functions, the `optionalInt`, `optionalLong` and `optionalDouble`
functions are supposed to box a primitive value property of a context object into a primitve optional value. 
These extension functions however never return `null` . They return an empty optional if the the given context object is `null`. If the context object is not `null` the value returned by the given mapper function is wrapped into the returned optional.

Example:

[source,xtend]
----
----

=== Default Values on `null` Boxes

The `onNull` extension functions for boxed primitives check if a given reference to a boxed primitive value
and will compute a default value via a given supplier if the box reference is `null`, otherwise they return
the unboxed primitive value.

Example:

[source,xtend]
----
----

[TIP]
====
Related JavaDocs:

* https://javadoc.io/page/com.github.fraunhoferfokus.xtensions/de.fhg.fokus.xtensions/latest/de/fhg/fokus/xtensions/Primitives.html[Primitives]
====
