docs/development.adoc, before:

////
Copyright (c) 2017 Max Bureck (Fraunhofer FOKUS) and others.
All rights reserved. This program and the accompanying materials
are made available under the terms of the Eclipse Public License v2.0
which accompanies this distribution, and is available at
http://www.eclipse.org/legal/epl-v20.html

Contributors:
    Max Bureck (Fraunhofer FOKUS) - initial text
////

= Development of the Xtensions Library
:toc: macro

toc::[]


This chapter gives an overview over how to get stated on development of the Xtensions library.


== Setting up the IDE

The repository contains the Eclipse Oomph setup file link:https://raw.githubusercontent.com/fraunhoferfokus/Xtensions/master/releng/de.fhg.fokus.xtensions.setup/Xtensions.setup[Xtensions.setup] 
for the Eclipse IDE.

Start the Eclipse installer, then switch to advanced mode (hamburger menu in the top-right corner).
Select the "Eclipse IDE for Java Development" and press "Next >". On the next page press the green
plus button and select the catalog "Github Projects" and paste the URL of the setup file above 
into the "Resource URIs" text field. Then select the checkbox next to the "Xtensions" entry and
press "Next >". Enter the installation details as preferred, press "Next >", then press "Finish". 
The Eclipse IDE will be installed and configured. It may need to restart one ore more times.

For the most relevant maven builds, run configurations are checked into the repositories,
open the "Run > Run Configurations" dialog from the main menu to browse and start a build.
If you want to start a build from the command line, read the next chapter.

== Build

The build is based on maven tycho, the wrapper script `mvnw` in the root directory of the repository takes care of the maven installation.
On Linux and Mac you might need to call `chmod +x mvnw`.

To build the libraries from source, simply drop into the root directory and call 

[source,bash]
----
./mvnw clean package
----

Afterwards, the main library will be located in `bundles/de.fhg.fokus.xtensions/target`

The p2 update site containing the library is located in directory `p2/de.fhg.fokus.xtensions.p2/target/repository`.


Have a look at the `.travis.yml` file on how snapshot builds (on every commit) and release builds and deployments
(when a tag is pushed to GitHub, see <<Performing a Release>>) are done.

=== Building Incubation Bundles

To build incubation bundles, enable the maven profile "incubation".

=== Code Coverage 

To produce a Jacoco covarage report (how much library code is covered by the test cases) 
and push the report to coveralls.io enable the maven profile  "coverage-report". 
The result of the report is located in the directory 
`releng/de.fhg.fokus.xtensions.report/target/site/jacoco-aggregate/`.
In future the report generation and the coveralls publishing will be separated into different 
maven profiles.

Be aware that the coverage report misses all inlined Xtension library methods. This includes
most of the methods of the class `de.fhg.fokus.xtensions.datetime.DurationExtensions`.

=== Skipping Test Project Compilation

To skip the compilation of the test project, pass the system property "release" to
the maven build, e.g. passing parameter `-Drelease`. This does not actually trigger
a release to bintray, it just skips compiling the test project. Have a look at the 
`.travis.yml` file to see how a release deployment is performed on Travis CI.

=== Documentation Build

The documentation is written in AsciiDoc and written in a way so HTML can be generated 
via link:https://toolchain.gitbook.com/[GitBook].

To use GitBook, first install `npm` your preferred way. To install the GitBook tooling call

[source,bash]
----
npm install gitbook-cli -g
----

To prepare the build of the documentation, switch to the root directory of the repository
and call 

[source,bash]
----
gitbook install
----

To actually generate the HTML, call the following command in the root repository location

[source,bash]
----
gitbook build
----

The result of the generation should then be located in the `_book` directory.

To start a web server providing a view on the documentation that should update itself whenever
the AsciiDoc sources change, call the following command in the root repository path.

[source,bash]
----
gitbook serve
----

== External Contributions

Please have a look at the link:../CONTRIBUTING.adoc[contribution guide].

== Performing a Release

On every push to the GitHub repository a build is triggered and a snapshot is deployed to 
the JFrog Artifactory maven snapshot repository. This requires no process. However, performing
a release of a stable version requires several steps.

Releasing a new version of the Xtensions library is mostly automated. To trigger a 
release, a new tag has to be created in the GitHub project. This tag *must* be a 
valid sem-ver version number `major.minor.patch`.

Here is a checklist of steps to perform (in this order).
Ideally the first three steps are already done directly after a previous release.

- [ ] Update the version of root `pom.xml` (keep the `-SNAPSHOT` suffix, it will be removed during the build). 
- [ ] Update the version of every bundle and feature project (see folders `bundles`, `features`, `tests`, `bundles-incubation`, and `tests-incubation`)
- [ ] Adjust the `.travis/bintray-deploy.json` file declaring the new version
- [ ] Update the `README.adoc` file
- [ ] Create/push the tag of the new version number
- [ ] Check if p2 deployment to bintray worked
- [ ] Log into bintray to promote the release to maven central

Commit message:

Disabled push of coverage report to coveralls by default
* Disables push of coverage report to coveralls by default on code
  coverage profile introduced new parameter for push.
* Fixed typo in CHANGES.adoc

docs/development.adoc, after:

////
Copyright (c) 2017 Max Bureck (Fraunhofer FOKUS) and others.
All rights reserved. This program and the accompanying materials
are made available under the terms of the Eclipse Public License v2.0
which accompanies this distribution, and is available at
http://www.eclipse.org/legal/epl-v20.html

Contributors:
    Max Bureck (Fraunhofer FOKUS) - initial text
////

= Development of the Xtensions Library
:toc: macro

toc::[]


This chapter gives an overview over how to get stated on development of the Xtensions library.


== Setting up the IDE

The repository contains the Eclipse Oomph setup file link:https://raw.githubusercontent.com/fraunhoferfokus/Xtensions/master/releng/de.fhg.fokus.xtensions.setup/Xtensions.setup[Xtensions.setup] 
for the Eclipse IDE.

Start the Eclipse installer, then switch to advanced mode (hamburger menu in the top-right corner).
Select the "Eclipse IDE for Java Development" and press "Next >". On the next page press the green
plus button and select the catalog "Github Projects" and paste the URL of the setup file above 
into the "Resource URIs" text field. Then select the checkbox next to the "Xtensions" entry and
press "Next >". Enter the installation details as preferred, press "Next >", then press "Finish". 
The Eclipse IDE will be installed and configured. It may need to restart one ore more times.

For the most relevant maven builds, run configurations are checked into the repositories,
open the "Run > Run Configurations" dialog from the main menu to browse and start a build.
If you want to start a build from the command line, read the next chapter.

== Build

The build is based on maven tycho, the wrapper script `mvnw` in the root directory of the repository takes care of the maven installation.
On Linux and Mac you might need to call `chmod +x mvnw`.

To build the libraries from source, simply drop into the root directory and call 

[source,bash]
----
./mvnw clean package
----

Afterwards, the main library will be located in `bundles/de.fhg.fokus.xtensions/target`

The p2 update site containing the library is located in directory `p2/de.fhg.fokus.xtensions.p2/target/repository`.


Have a look at the `.travis.yml` file on how snapshot builds (on every commit) and release builds and deployments
(when a tag is pushed to GitHub, see <<Performing a Release>>) are done.

=== Building Incubation Bundles

To build incubation bundles, enable the maven profile "incubation".

=== Code Coverage 

To produce a Jacoco covarage report (how much library code is covered by the test cases) 
enable the maven profile  `coverage-report`. 
The result of the report is located in the directory 
`releng/de.fhg.fokus.xtensions.report/target/site/jacoco-aggregate/`.

To push the results of the code coverage report to coveralls.io, define the system property
`coveralls`, this will automatically enable profile `coverage-report` as well, it 
does not have to be activated separately. This can be done by passing parameter `-Dcoveralls` when invoking maven.

Be aware that the coverage report misses all inlined Xtension library methods. This includes
most of the methods of the class `de.fhg.fokus.xtensions.datetime.DurationExtensions`.

=== Skipping Test Project Compilation

To skip the compilation of the test project, pass the system property "release" to
the maven build, e.g. passing parameter `-Drelease`. This does not actually trigger
a release to bintray, it just skips compiling the test project. Have a look at the 
`.travis.yml` file to see how a release deployment is performed on Travis CI.

=== Documentation Build

The documentation is written in AsciiDoc and written in a way so HTML can be generated 
via link:https://toolchain.gitbook.com/[GitBook].

To use GitBook, first install `npm` your preferred way. To install the GitBook tooling call

[source,bash]
----
npm install gitbook-cli -g
----

To prepare the build of the documentation, switch to the root directory of the repository
and call 

[source,bash]
----
gitbook install
----

To actually generate the HTML, call the following command in the root repository location

[source,bash]
----
gitbook build
----

The result of the generation should then be located in the `_book` directory.

To start a web server providing a view on the documentation that should update itself whenever
the AsciiDoc sources change, call the following command in the root repository path.

[source,bash]
----
gitbook serve
----

== External Contributions

Please have a look at the link:../CONTRIBUTING.adoc[contribution guide].

== Performing a Release

On every push to the GitHub repository a build is triggered and a snapshot is deployed to 
the JFrog Artifactory maven snapshot repository. This requires no process. However, performing
a release of a stable version requires several steps.

Releasing a new version of the Xtensions library is mostly automated. To trigger a 
release, a new tag has to be created in the GitHub project. This tag *must* be a 
valid sem-ver version number `major.minor.patch`.

Here is a checklist of steps to perform (in this order).
Ideally the first three steps are already done directly after a previous release.

- [ ] Update the version of root `pom.xml` (keep the `-SNAPSHOT` suffix, it will be removed during the build). 
- [ ] Update the version of every bundle and feature project (see folders `bundles`, `features`, `tests`, `bundles-incubation`, and `tests-incubation`)
- [ ] Adjust the `.travis/bintray-deploy.json` file declaring the new version
- [ ] Update the `README.adoc` file
- [ ] Create/push the tag of the new version number
- [ ] Check if p2 deployment to bintray worked
- [ ] Log into bintray to promote the release to maven central
